whoami - to display the user
man -  for manual
clear -  to clear the screen
pwd - print working directory
ls - list all files     ls -a - list all hidden files
cd - change directory   cd / - to roor directory    cd ~ -to home directory
mkdir - makes a directory
touch - makes a files
rmdir - deletes a directory or file(empty ons)
rm - deletes file   rm -r file/directory name - deletes all recursive files
open - opens a file     open filename
mv - movees a file
cp - copies a file

head - displays the top 10 contents in a file by default   
tail - displays bottom 10 contents in a file by default 

date - prints the present date and time
To move output of a command to a file we use '>'    date > file.txt This command updates each time
>> appends to a file
cat - displays the contents of a file   cat note.txt
cat note1.tx note2.txt - displays the appended data from both files

less - shows contents of a file in interactive way

echo - prints the arguments passed to it     echo 'Hello' prints Hello 

wc - gives the line count, word count and size
Piping(|) - used to pass output of a command to the input of another command
ls -l | wc

sort - to sort the contents of a file. by default sorts alphabetically
sort -n - sorts numerically

uniq - for sorting lines of text. only adjacent duplicate values are ignored

Match path names - '*', ???, {}
ls -l *.txt displays list files with .txt extension
echo *.??? shows any file with extension having three characters
echo {a,b,c}.txt  - creates all combinations of a,b and c with .txt / creates a.txt b.txt c.txt

diff - tells the difference between two files   diff note1.txt note2.txt

find - used to find files or folder matching a particular criteria
find . -name '7' looks for all files with name 7
find . type d -name '*E' -looks for directory with E in directory name
find type d -size +100k -size -1M looks for file with size between 100k and 1M

grep - used to search in contents of a file
grep The note.txt  - searches for 'The' inside note.txt    -n gives line no.   

du - calculates size of directory
df - gives disk usage information
history - displays history
ps - gives the running processes

top - used to list process running in real time
kill - used to terminate a running process
killall - used to kill multiplee processes

jobs - we can set a program to run in background using '&'. but for multiple programs we need job number. we use job command to get that
fg - runs the suspended prograam in the foreground.
bg - runs it in the background

gzip - compresses  file     gzip note.txt -compresses a file
gzip -k note.txt -creates a new compressed file(note.txt.gz)    gzip -d note.txt.gz -decompresses
gunzip - used for decompressing

tar - used to create archive by groupung multiple files into a single file
tar -cf archive.tar file1 file2  -c to create archive, f to write files into archive
To unarchive    tar -xf archive.tar
To compress archived file   tar -czf archive.tar file1 file2

nano - text editr that can be opened from terminal      nano note.txt will  enter into contents f note.txt
alias - we can provide alias for any commands using this keword     alias myls = 'ls -a' will make myls perform same task as ls -adjacent

xargs - used to convert standard iputs types to arguments
commands like rm doesn't accept standard inputs.
cat note.txt | rm  - will not work as rm doesn't accept standard inputs but only arguments. so we use xargs
cat note.txt | xargs rm will work

ln - used to create links(pointer to another file)
ln note1.txt note2.txt - note2.txt will point to note1.txt. this is hard link. cannot create hard links to directories
ln -s will create soft links. when original file is deleted soft link will not work

who - dispalys all users logged
su - allows to switch between users
sudo - used to run a command as root
passwd - change password

chown - used to change the owner to another user    
chown user file
-R - recursively allows to change owner of directory or file or sub files
chown owner:group file - changes the group owner

ls -l gives a list of files. first column denotes the type
--rw-rw--R
first character denotes the file type   
- regular file, d directory, c character special file, l symbolic link
r read, w write, x execute permissions

chmod - used to alter permissions
First specify 'who' using values: u user, g group, o others, a allNext we specify 'what' we are doing using characters: - removes permission, + grants, 
= sets permission for a particular one and removes others
Last we specify 'which' values: r read, w write, x execute
file.txt    -rw-r--r--
chmod g + w file.txt    -rw-rw-r--
chmod go + w file.txt